Student Eligibility | 2025-2026 Federal Student Aid Handbook

2025-2026 Federal Student Aid Handbook

Search

Search

Volume 1

Student Eligibility

Introduction

This volume of the 
Federal Student Aid Handbook
 discusses the eligibility requirements for all 
Title IV
 aid applicants and your responsibilities to ensure that recipients qualify for their aid awards.

Sources of Information

There are many factors you must consider when reviewing an application for aid from the FSA programs, such as whether the student meets the U.S. citizenship or eligible noncitizen requirements for 
Title IV
 aid, whether the applicant is making satisfactory academic progress, and whether they have a defaulted loan from the Direct Loan, FFEL, or Perkins Loan programs. To answer these questions, you will receive information about the student from different sources, including the Department of Education’s FAFSA Processing System (FPS) for financial aid applications and the National Student Loan Data System (NSLDS).

Throughout the year, the Department of Education (The Department) provides updates for schools in the form of Dear Colleague Letters (DCLs). These and other releases, such as 
Federal Register
 notices and electronic announcements, contain system updates and technical guidance, and are available on the Knowledge Center (
fsapartners.ed.gov/knowledge center
).

The FSA Handbook does not cover the operation of software. For schools using software provided by the Department, there are technical references on FSA Partner Connect that explain how the software operates. Schools using third-party software should consult the vendor’s reference materials for technical guidance.

 Program and systems information on the Knowledge Center
 

Software:

EDconnect

EDExpress for Windows (including Direct Loan Tools)

Technical References and User Guides for:

FPS (
FAFSA Specifications Guide
, 
ISIR guide
, etc.)

Federal Registers

Electronic Announcements

Dear Colleague Letters

FSA Assessments

 FSA Fundamentals
 

FSA Fundamentals, a self-paced, comprehensive online guide to the 
Title IV
 programs, has been updated for domestic schools. For more information, see:

Training Workshops – 2024-25 Fundamentals Training Series | Knowledge Center

Recent Changes

Throughout this volume, we have added and updated links for easy access to regulations and other supporting guidance.

Here are some of the other significant changes to Volume 1 for 2025-2026:

Chapter 1:

Clarified rules for when students must pay the costs of evaluating foreign high school diplomas

Revised list of states with approved state processes for ATB alternatives

Updated criteria for documenting enrollment in an eligible career pathway program

Added guidance on minimum enrollment status standards for certain graduate programs

Chapter 2:

Expanded information on forms useful for U.S. citizenship/nationality documentation

Updated guidance for eligibility for students from the Freely Associated States

Updated documentation requirements for Jay Treaty students

Clarified third-step verification process and processing times guidance

Expanded guidance on replacing lost, stolen, or damaged DHS documents and contacting USCIS

Chapter 3:

Revised many section headings for clarity

Updated NSLDS loan status codes guidance

Chapter 4:

Updated guidance on when students report an incorrect social security number on the FAFSA

Updated guidance for contributors with no social security number.

Questions or comments?

We appreciate any comments that you have on Volume 1 of the FSA Handbook. We revise the text based on questions and feedback from the financial aid community, so please reach out to us about how to improve the Handbook at 
Contact Customer Support | Help Center (ed.gov)
, by clicking on “FSA Handbook” in the “topic” dropdown menu.

Previous

Next

 Last Modified: 12/12/2025 • Published: 03/28/2021