U.S. Citizenship & Eligible Noncitizens | 2025-2026 Federal Student Aid Handbook

2025-2026 Federal Student Aid Handbook

Search

Search

Chapter 2

U.S. Citizenship & Eligible Noncitizens

A student must be a U.S. citizen or national, a citizen of the Freely Associated States, a lawful permanent resident, or other eligible noncitizen to be potentially eligible for federal student aid. In this chapter, we describe how the student’s FAFSA information is matched with other agencies to determine citizenship or immigration status. We also describe the immigration documents that you may need to collect to ensure the student’s eligibility.

U.S. Citizenship and Eligible Categories

A student must be one of the following to be eligible to receive federal student aid:

A U.S. citizen or U.S. national;

A citizen of the Freely Associated States: the Federated States of Micronesia and the Republics of Palau and the Marshall Islands.
 These students can only receive aid from some of the FSA programs and may not have an A-number (Note: The A-Number may also be referred to as a USCIS Number on certain U.S. Citizenship and Immigration (USCIS) documents.) A-number has replaced Alien registration number/ARN. See “Citizens of the Freely Associated States” section later in this chapter; or

A U.S. lawful permanent resident or other eligible noncitizen.

The Department matches all applications with the Social Security Administration (SSA) on U.S. citizenship. If U.S. citizenship or nationality cannot be confirmed, the student must provide documents proving U.S. citizenship or nationality, citizenship of the Freely Associated States, lawful permanent residence, or other eligible noncitizen status to satisfy the citizenship requirement for 
Title IV
 eligibility. If the student provides an A-Number on the FAFSA form, their record is also sent to the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) to check their eligible noncitizen immigration status or category.

The results of both matches appear on the Institutional Student Information Report (ISIR). A failed match with either agency will produce a “C code” on the student’s ISIR. A student’s U.S. citizenship or nationality (or eligible noncitizen) status only needs to be checked once for the award year; if the student has an eligible status at that time, the student remains potentially eligible for the rest of the award year (except for parolees; see the “Third-Step Verification” section below).

If a parent wants to take out a PLUS loan for a dependent undergraduate student, both the parent and the student must be a U.S. citizen, national, or eligible noncitizen.

Note that USCIS forms and websites may use the term “alien” as defined in section 101(a)(3) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(3)) instead of “noncitizen.”

U.S. Citizenship and U.S. Nationality

A person is a U.S. citizen by birth, naturalization, or operation of law. Persons born in the 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Guam, and people born on or after November 4, 1986 in the Northern Mariana Islands are U.S. citizens (except for the children born to foreign diplomatic officers accredited to the United States or other persons with comparable diplomatic status, who are not considered U.S. citizens). Also, many persons born abroad to U.S. citizen parents (or a parent) may be U.S. citizens. All U.S. citizens are considered U.S. nationals, but not all U.S. nationals are U.S. citizens. Persons who are not U.S. citizens, but were born in American Samoa (which includes Swains Islands) (or certain persons born abroad to a noncitizen U.S. national parent) are not U.S. citizens but 
are
 U.S. nationals, and therefore may also receive 
Title IV
 funds.

Child Citizenship Act (CCA)

The 
CCA
 became effective on February 27, 2001. As of that date, foreign-born children who are not U.S. citizens at birth become citizens once these conditions are met:

at least one parent (including biological or adoptive) is a U.S. citizen,

the children live in the legal and physical custody of that parent,

they are under 18 years of age, and

they are a lawful permanent resident.

Children newly entering the country who are the subject of a full and final adoption abroad prior to the issuance of their IR-3 visa (for orphans) or IH-3 visa (for children from countries party to the Hague Convention on the Protection of Children and Co-operation in Respect of Intercountry Adoption) generally become citizens upon admission to the United States. They generally receive a Certificate of Citizenship within 45 days instead of receiving a permanent resident card. For more information see 
https://www.uscis.gov/policy-manual/volume-12
.

Children who are admitted to the U.S. with an IR-4 visa (for orphans) or IH-4 visa (for children from Hague Convention countries) generally become citizens once their adoption is completed (or they are re-adopted or obtain state recognition of the foreign adoption) in the United States. Parents of these and other children who do not automatically receive a certificate of citizenship can request one by filing Form N-600. For more information, contact USCIS, visit the website at 
www.uscis.gov
, or see the State Department’s intercountry adoption website at 
http://adoption.state.gov/
.

If a student who falls under this category fails the citizenship match, the student would need to provide acceptable proof of citizenship by providing documents such as those listed below under the U.S. citizenship documentation section.

 Citizenship
 

HEA Sec. 484(a)(5)

34 CFR 668.32(d)

34 CFR 668.33

Subpart I of Part 668

U.S. Citizenship Match With the SSA

All applications are matched with SSA records to verify U.S. citizenship, name, date of birth, and Social Security number (SSN) (see 
Chapter 4
). The FAFSA Processing System (FPS) will reject the application for insufficient information if name, date of birth or SSN is not provided. The student’s match result is reported in the “SSA Citizenship” field and Match Flags section on the FAFSA Submission Summary and ISIR. If the student leaves the citizenship question blank on the FAFSA form, the FPS will still attempt the citizenship match with the SSA. If there is a complete match with the student’s SSN, name, date of birth, and U.S. citizenship, the FPS will report the student to be a U.S. citizen.

Successful match.
 The FAFSA Submission Summary and ISIR will have a match flag (but no comment) indicating that the student’s U.S. citizenship was confirmed.

Data doesn’t match.
 If the student’s SSN, name, or date of birth doesn’t match SSA records, their U.S. citizenship can’t be confirmed, and a C code and a comment will appear on the output documents (FAFSA Submission Summary and ISIR). If the student misreported their SSN, name, or date of birth (see Chapter 4 for more on SSN match problems), they should correct the appropriate field on their FAFSA Submission Summary and re-submit it. The FPS will perform the match again, and you must see if the new ISIR confirms the student’s U.S. citizenship; if it does, the C code will no longer appear.

U.S. citizenship not confirmed.
 The ISIR and FAFSA Submission Summary will include a C code and a comment (
code 018
) explaining that the SSA was unable to confirm the student is a U.S. citizen and that they need to provide their college or career school’s financial aid office with documents proving U.S. citizenship (see below). If the student provides eligible noncitizen documentation, you or the student must make a correction by entering the student’s A-Number on the ISIR or FAFSA Submission Summary, and changing the response in the citizenship status field (Question 13) to “Eligible noncitizen.” If you are making the correction, also select “yes” on the drop-down box in the “Resend Record to Matches” field before selecting the “submit” button. FPS will attempt a match with DHS records to confirm the student’s immigration status or category.

Note that U.S. citizens born abroad might fail the citizenship check, unless they have updated their citizenship information with SSA (see “Updating status for U.S. citizens born abroad” later in this chapter).

U.S. Citizenship or Nationality Documentation

If a student must prove their status as a U.S. citizen or national, only certain types of documentation are acceptable. The Department doesn’t specify all of the acceptable documents, but some documents you might choose to use to prove U.S. citizenship/nationality include:

A Certificate of Naturalization (Forms N-550 or N-570)
 issued by USCIS, the former INS, or a court to individuals who naturalize. You must copy this document for the student’s file. If the student presents evidence of U.S. citizenship, but SSA did not identify them as a U.S. citizen, you should advise the student to update their status with SSA.

A Certificate of Citizenship (Forms N-560 or N-561)
 is issued by USCIS or the former INS to individuals who derive or acquire U.S. citizenship through a parent or naturalize based on having a U.S. citizen parent and meeting certain other requirements.

A copy of the student’s birth certificate
 showing that the student was born in the U.S. or its territories, which includes Puerto Rico, Guam, the U.S. Virgin Islands, American Samoa (including Swains Islands) or the Northern Mariana Islands (on or after November 4, 1986). Birth certificates for a person born to a foreign diplomatic officer accredited to the U.S. or other person with comparable diplomatic status in the United States are not acceptable. If a student has a birth certificate from a U.S. jurisdiction showing that the student was born abroad (i.e., not in the U.S. or its territories), that birth certificate is not acceptable documentation. See below for acceptable State Department documentation.

A U.S. passport,
 during its period of validity, issued by the Department of State (except for “limited” passports, which are typically issued for shorter periods, such as a year). In the case of U.S. nationals who are not U.S. citizens, the passport will be stamped “Noncitizen National” (U.S. nationals are potentially eligible for 
Title IV
 aid). Five-year-duration U.S. passports commonly issued to younger travelers are considered acceptable documentation and are not considered “limited.” One-year-duration U.S. passports are 
not
 acceptable documentation. A student may apply for a U.S. passport at the U.S. Department of State’s website: 
https://travel.state.gov/content/travel/en/passports/need-passport.html
.

A wallet-sized passport card,
 during its period of validity, issued by the Department of State, is valid evidence of the U.S. citizenship and identity of the bearer, but can only be used for land and sea travel between the U.S. and Canada, Mexico, the Caribbean, and Bermuda. A student may apply for a U.S. passport card at the U.S. Department of State’s website: 
https://travel.state.gov/content/travel/en/passports/apply-renew-passport/card.html
. For more detail, see 
22 CFR 51.4(b)(2)
.

A copy of Form FS-240 (Consular Report of Birth Abroad), FS-545 (Certificate of Birth Issued by a Foreign Service Post), or DS-1350 (Certification of Report of Birth).
 These are Department of State documents. The FS-545 and DS-1350 are no longer issued, but all three are still valid. See the 
Documentary Evidence of U.S. Citizenship Issued to Persons Born Abroad page of the State Department’s Foreign Affairs Manual
.

Before you can disburse aid, the student must present documentation that verifies that they are a U.S. citizen or national. If the documents indicate that the student is a U.S. citizen or national, you may award and disburse aid to the student and the C-code may remain on the student’s ISIR. Keep a copy of the documentation in the student’s file, even though older versions of the Certificate of Citizenship and of the Certificate of Naturalization instruct the holder not to photocopy them. Citizenship or nationality documentation must be kept in the student’s file but does not need to be verified by any outside agency. Handling of documents for eligible noncitizens differs, and is discussed later in this chapter. The student can also contact the SSA to update the student’s record. This updating is not required to receive aid but may prevent issues with SSA matching in the future.

At your school’s discretion, you may permit U.S. citizen and U.S. national students to photocopy, scan, or otherwise image their citizenship documents, and submit either electronic images or paper copies of the same to the school’s financial aid office for the purpose of determining their eligibility for 
Title IV
 funds. For more information, see Dear Colleague Letter 
GEN-15-18
.

Updating Status for U.S. Citizens Born Abroad

Students born abroad to U.S. citizen parents are U.S. citizens if they meet certain requirements. Their status is usually noted in the SSA’s database when they receive an SSN. Occasionally, a student may not have provided sufficient proof of U.S. citizenship to SSA for the record to be updated. These students will fail the U.S. citizenship match, even if they have an SSN. If this occurs, the student must provide the school proof of U.S. citizenship as outlined below. The student should contact the SSA to have their record corrected, however, this update is not required to receive aid.

Such students can document US. citizenship by providing:

“Consular Report of Birth Abroad” (CRBA)”
 (
Form FS-240
, which is 
proof
 of U.S. citizenship),

“Certification of Report of Birth”
 (
Form DS-1350
, which is 
evidence
 of U.S. citizenship and equivalent to a birth certificate),

Certification of Birth Abroad of a Citizen of the United States (Form FS-545)
, or

Certificate of Citizenship (Forms N-560 or N-561)
 issued by USCIS.

The Forms DS-1350 and FS-545 are no longer issued but are still accepted as documentation of U.S. citizenship. If the birth of the student was registered with the American consulate or embassy in a foreign country before they turn 18, they can request the FS-240, Consular Report of Birth Abroad by sending a written, notarized request to the U.S. Department of State’s Passport Vital Records Section. The State Department does not reissue new DS-1350 forms. If the student had a Form DS-1350 and lost it, or never received a Form FS-240 or Certificate of Citizenship before turning 18, the student may apply for a U.S. Passport from the Department of State or for a Certificate of Citizenship from USCIS. To apply for a Certificate of Citizenship, the student should file Form N-600, available at the USCIS webpage: 
https://www.uscis.gov/n-600
.

For pictures of the U.S. citizen documents listed above, see the end of this chapter.

Citizenship Not Confirmed (Vol. 1 Chapter 2, Example 1)

The student is a U.S. citizen, but SSA doesn’t confirm their U.S. citizenship. The FAA asks the student to submit documentation of their status. The student first submits a Social Security card, but the administrator explains that the card doesn’t document their status because individuals who are not citizens can have Social Security cards. The student then brings in their Certificate of Naturalization. The FAA makes a copy of the certificate for their file and tells the student their citizenship has been documented. The FAA also advises the student to have the SSA correct its database so that they won’t have this problem again.

Mandatory Notification of SSA for Name Changes

Whenever a student legally changes their name because of marriage, divorce, court order, or any other reason, they must tell the SSA so they can get a corrected card and have correct SSN matches in the future. The student must bring the appropriate documents to prove the change to their local SSA office. See 
the SSA name change page
 for more information.

Parent Signature on Certificates of Citizenship

Because documents such as a certificate of citizenship can be issued to minors, they may be signed by a parent or guardian instead of the minor child. This does not affect the legitimacy of the document.

Citizens of the Freely Associated States

The United States has entered into 
Compacts of Free Association
 with three independent nations from the former Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands: the Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI), the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM), and the Republic of Palau. These three entities are collectively known as the Freely Associated States (FAS). See Pub.L. 118-42; HEA Sec. 103(20)(B); and 
34 CFR 600.2
.

Students who are citizens of the Freely Associated States (FAS) are eligible for Pell Grants, and as of the 2024 revision to the Compact Amendments Act, FWS and FSEOG as well (see the “Compact Amendment Act 2024 Revision section below). FAS students are not eligible for Direct Loans. These students should have a passport from the Freely Associated States or a Form I-94.

Each FAS student should indicate on the FAFSA form that they are an “eligible noncitizen” and leave the A-Number item blank. Because the student isn’t providing an A-Number, their application won’t go through the DHS match. Do not complete a third-step verification for these students—they will fail the match. Instead, request documentation of the student’s Freely Associated States citizenship. Once you have received the student’s document establishing their status as a citizen of the Freely Associated States, make a copy of the document and place it in the student’s file. You can reuse the original document in future years if it hasn’t expired.

In-State Tuition for FAS Students at Public Schools

Under the 2024 Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2024, a public school must charge students who are citizens of the FAS no more than the in-state tuition rate.

Compact Amendments Act 2024 Revision

The original 
Compact of Free Association Amendments Act
 of 2003, or the 
Compact Amendments Act
, eliminated eligibility for citizens of the RMI and the FSM for FSEOG and FWS funds. To mitigate this loss, the 
Compact Amendments Act
 authorized students from the FSM and RMI to receive Supplemental Education Grants. However, in 2024, the 
Compact Amendments Act
 was revised in Public Law 118-42. Section 209(b)(1)(D) restored FSEOG eligibility for students from the FSM and RMI. Additionally, the 
Compact Amendments Act
 added Federal Work Study (FWS) eligibility for these students (provided they meet all other eligibility criteria). Citizens of the FAS are also still potentially eligible for Pell Grants. Note that Supplemental Education Grants (not to be confused with FSEOG) have been discontinued. For more details, see the 
Electronic Announcement GEN-24-50
.

 Citizens of the Freely Associated States
 

Title IV eligibility: 
Electronic Announcement GEN-24-50

In-State Tuition for FAS Students: 
Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2024, Sec 209(b)(1)(E) of Title II, Division G
 (aka Public Law 118-42)

Eligible Noncitizen Match With DHS

The U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) assigns an A-Number to most individuals who are not U.S. citizens, which FSA uses to identify which applications must have their data sent to DHS for immigration status/category verification. 
If the applicant indicates on the FAFSA form that they are an “eligible noncitizen” and provides an A-Number, identifying information is sent to DHS for eligible noncitizen verification.
 DHS verification is conducted by 
SAVE
, an online service administered by USCIS, an agency within DHS.

The results of the match are shown by a match flag in the “FAA Information” section of the output document, under the headings “DHS Primary Status,” “DHS Secondary Match Status” (Secondary Confirmation Flag), and “DHS Case Number” on the FAFSA Submission Summary and ISIR. There will also be a comment about the results on the output document.

Because all applications are matched with the SSA records, an application with an A-Number will be matched against both SSA records and records available to DHS. When results are received from both agencies, a successful SSA match will indicate that the student is a U.S. citizen. If the SSA match is unsuccessful, the DHS match status will determine the student’s eligible noncitizen status/category.

The following are some common DHS match results:

Successful match
 (Y primary match status) - if the match confirms the student’s immigration status or category, they can receive aid if the other eligibility criteria are also met. 
Comment code 154
 will appear on the FAFSA Submission Summary and ISIR, and the successful match results are evidence of the student’s eligibility. If you have other information about their status that seems to contradict the successful match result, you must resolve the conflict before disbursing funds (see “Conflicting Information” in 
Chapter 1
) by performing the third-step verification process.

Record was not sent to DHS due to data entry errors
 (blank match status) - the match won’t be attempted if the student:

left the A-Number field blank,

said they were an “eligible noncitizen” but provided no A-Number (
code 022
),

changed their response to the citizenship question (
code 019
), or

changed their A-Number or citizenship status after previous verification by the DHS (
code 020
).

Instead, the student will receive a C code and a comment explaining the problem and directing them to provide the school with their most recent immigration documentation to support their eligibility. Compare the student’s immigration document with the FAFSA Submission Summary/ISIR to determine the appropriate resolution action.

If you or the student corrects the A-Number and resubmits it so that the match can be conducted, and DHS verifies the student’s eligible noncitizen status, the C code will not appear on the new ISIR. To ensure that the corrected ISIR is matched with DHS, you must select “yes” from the drop-down box in the “Resend Record to Matches” field before you submit the correction. If the student’s eligibility is not confirmed, (
primary match status = N
), proceed with third-step verification.

Student’s noncitizen status/category has not yet been confirmed
 (N primary match status and C code). Again, this means that you must proceed to third-step verification.

A case has already been submitted
 (D primary match status) - cases that are already in review at DHS (i.e., a case with the A-Number provided on the FAFSA form has already been created) are given a “D” status, and comment code 288 is displayed. If you have questions about this status, please contact 
applicationsystemsdivision@ed.gov
.

An invalid A-Number was provided
 (I primary match status) - the value of “I” indicates that an invalid A-Number was submitted, and comment code 289 is displayed.

Match Result is Pending
 (P primary match status) - the results of this match are pending. There is no comment or C code associated with this match result.

Record was not sent to DHS
 (S match status) - the student’s data was not sent to DHS. There is no comment or C code associated with this match result.

For additional guidance on the DHS-SAVE system and DHS Match statuses, see 
the SAVE Instructions for U.S. Department of Education (School) Users 4.0 document
. For assistance with interpreting a SAVE response, please email the student’s DHS Verification number to 
applicationsystemsdivision@ed.gov
 .

DHS Secondary Match Statuses and Comment Codes

The secondary match process with the DHS is not currently available. As a result, if the DHS Primary Match Status is “N” (Not confirmed eligible noncitizen), institutions should search for the case in the SAVE system and proceed with the third-step verification process. See 
EA GEN-24-100
 for more detail.

Student’s DHS Case Number for SAVE and Third-Step Verification

When a record is processed through the FPS match with DHS, a 15-digit case number is assigned to the student and printed in the “FAA Information” section of the FAFSA Submission Summary and ISIR. This 15-digit number, along with the applicant’s date of birth, is needed to access the student’s SAVE record, and to submit a third-step verification request through SAVE.

A-Number Corrections and Additions to the FAFSA Form

If the citizenship question is blank but there is an A-Number
, the FPS will send the record to DHS for matching.

If both the citizenship question and the A-Number are blank
, the record will not be sent to DHS. The output document will explain that SSA was unable to confirm that the student is a U.S. citizen. The student must submit a correction to the citizenship status and A-Number if they are an eligible noncitizen.

If U.S. citizen or national is selected, but the student provides an eligible noncitizen document
, correct question 13 on the ISIR to “eligible noncitizen” and enter the A-Number and select “yes” from the drop-down box in the “Resend Record to Matches” field. This correction will tell FPS to send the record to the DHS Primary match. Ignore comment code 018 from SSA on the current ISIR. Wait for the DHS Match statuses on the student’s next ISIR to determine if the student has an eligible noncitizen or if a third-step verification is necessary.

If the A-Number on the FAFSA Submission Summary or ISIR does not match the A-Number on the student’s immigration document
, correct the A-Number and select “yes” from the drop-down box in the “Resend Record to Matches” field. This will send the corrected record, which DHS considers a new record because of the new A-Number, to the DHS Primary match. Ignore DHS comment codes 
293
 and 
294
 on the current ISIR. Do not complete third-step verification unless the DHS Match statuses on the resulting ISIR indicate that third-step verification is necessary. For more detail on these codes, see the 
2025-26 FAFSA Specification Guide
 on the Knowledge Center.

 Conditions requiring secondary confirmation
 

34 CFR 668.133(a)

 School policies and procedures on secondary confirmation
 

34 CFR 668.134–135

Electronic Announcement GEN-24-100

Third-Step Verification

If the initial match result status is "N," or if you have conflicting information about their immigration status/category after receiving a primary or secondary match result, you must review the record for third-step verification.

Third-step Verification Preparation

Request the student’s most current, unexpired immigration document. When it is submitted, make a copy of it.

Carefully review the student’s immigration documentation against the status/category and document descriptions below.

Determine whether the student’s immigration documentation supports eligibility for 
Title IV
 aid. If it does not support an eligible status/category, you can tell the student that they are not eligible now, but may be eligible if/when they provide appropriate documentation. You should not complete third-step verification for this student.

For more on using SAVE to complete third-step verification, see the section titled “Using SAVE for Third-Step Verification” later in this chapter.

Eligible Noncitizens and Documentation

Certain individuals who are not U.S. citizens or nationals may be eligible for 
Title IV
 aid. Eligibility for 
Title IV
 aid, as a federal public benefit, is restricted under the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (PRWORA) to persons who can demonstrate certain types of eligible noncitizen statuses/categories as a “qualified alien” under 8 U.S.C. § 1641(b) and (c). In addition, 
Title IV
 of the HEA requires such individuals to be able to provide documentation that they are “in the United States for other than a temporary purpose with the intention of becoming a citizen or permanent resident” in order to establish their eligibility for federal student aid. In determining eligibility under both PRWORA and 
Title IV
 of the HEA, the Department accepts the following types of eligible noncitizen statuses/categories as sufficient to demonstrate a person’s eligibility for 
Title IV
 aid (see bulleted list below).”

The U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) – including its component agencies U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS); Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE); and U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) – and the U.S. Department of State (DOS) issue documents to individuals who are not U.S. citizens, including documentation that may serve as evidence of eligible noncitizen status. For general information and sample images, see the 
USCIS SAVE Commonly Used Immigration Documents
 page.

For classes of eligible noncitizens other than lawful permanent residents, evidence of their status/category is typically on Form 
I-94
, but other documentation may also be acceptable. DHS generally no longer issues a paper Form I-94 as they are generally available electronically from 
CBP’s website
. However, asylees and certain parolees continue to receive paper Form I-94. In September 2015, CBP automated the refugee admission process. Refugees will have access to an electronic form and will no longer receive a paper Form I-94. Students without paper Form I-94 documentation may have their status confirmed by the electronic Form I-94 printout and/or a CBP stamp, showing class of admission and date admitted or paroled in their passport to confirm this status.

Form I-797 (Notice of Action) is USCIS’s formal communication with customers and is issued when an application or petition is received or approved or to confer an immigration benefit.

Only when students have unsuccessful SSA and DHS matches, you have conflicting information, or you or the student disagrees with the SAVE response, must you perform third-step verification using SAVE to confirm that their documentation supports one of the following eligible noncitizen statuses or categories for 
Title IV
 eligibility purposes:

Lawful permanent residents

Conditional permanent residents

Conditional entrants

Refugees

Asylees (persons granted asylum)

Individuals paroled into the U.S. for at least one year

Ukrainian citizens or nationals paroled into the U.S. between February 24, 2022 and September 30, 2024 (and their immediate relatives paroled after that date)

Afghan citizens or nationals paroled into the U.S. between July 31, 2021, and September 30, 2023 (and their immediate relatives paroled after that date)

Cuban-Haitian Entrants

Victims of a severe form of trafficking

Battered or abused spouses or children

Certain American Indians Born in Canada (Jay Treaty students)

Each of these eligible noncitizen statuses/categories are discussed in their respective subsections below.

 Eligible Noncitizens
 

34 CFR 668.131

34 CFR 668.33(a)(2)

Lawful Permanent Residents

Lawful permanent residents (LPRs)
 are individuals who are not U.S. citizens who are legally permitted to live and work in the U.S. permanently. The standard document for demonstrating LPR is the 
Permanent Resident Card (Form I-551 since 1997) or Resident Alien Card (Form I-551 before 1997)
. Both forms are referred to colloquially as “green cards,” though they have changed colors over the years. Possessors of the older 
Alien Registration Receipt Card (Form I-151
, issued prior to June 1978) should have replaced it with a newer card, but for receiving 
Title IV
 funds, it is acceptable as evidence of permanent residence. In general, students whose Permanent Resident Card (PRC) has expired may still be considered lawful permanent residents for FSA eligibility purposes; therefore, if they submit expired documentation, submit it to SAVE and base eligibility on the response.

Note: USCIS may extend the validity of Permanent Resident Cards for lawful permanent residents who properly filed Form I-90, Application to Replace Permanent Resident card, to renew their PRC. If a PRC’s validity has been extended, the student will have a Form I-797, Notice of Action, receipt notice that extends the validity of the PRC.

LPRs may also present an 
Arrival/Departure Record (Form I-94)
 or the Departure Record (
Form I-94A
), with the endorsement “Processed for I-551. Temporary Evidence of Lawful Admission for Permanent Residence. Valid until _______. Employment Authorized.” If available, a Form I-551/PRC (also known as a “green card”) is preferable to establish LPR status. The form will have an A-Number annotated on it and is acceptable. Sometimes a temporary stamp expires but the student will retain LPR status. If the student’s temporary stamp is expired but the student believes that he or she is an LPR, submit the expired document to SAVE and a status verifier will confirm the student’s status.

The U.S. Department of State issues a 
machine-readable immigrant visa (MRIV)
 in the holder’s passport. The MRIV will have a U.S. CBP inspector admission stamp, and the statement “UPON ENDORSEMENT SERVES AS TEMPORARY I-551 EVIDENCING PERMANENT RESIDENCY” will appear directly above the machine-readable section. An MRIV with this statement, contained in an unexpired foreign passport and endorsed with the admission stamp, constitutes a temporary Form I-551, valid for one year from the date of endorsement on the stamp.

USCIS issues the 
U.S. Travel Document
 (mint green cover), which contains the Reentry Permit (
Form I-327
) and the Refugee Travel Document (
Form I-571
). It is used by lawful permanent residents, as well as refugees and asylees, and is annotated with “Permit to Reenter Form I-327 (Rev. 9-2-03).”

If the student has a 
Form I-551 with a baby picture
, they should update the Form I-551 with the USCIS. LPRs are expected to get a new picture and be fingerprinted at the age of 14. But you can submit the documents to USCIS and disburse 
Title IV
 funds to a student who has a Form I-551 with a baby picture if you can confirm that it belongs to the student. You can do this by comparing the Form I-551 to a current photo ID that has the student’s name, date of birth, and signature. The current ID must also be consistent with any identifying information in the student’s file.

A student who has an approved application for LPR status on file with the USCIS and who is waiting for a permanent resident card should have a 
Form I-797 from USCIS
 with "Notice Type: Approval Notice," as well as an A-Number, which will give notice of current status. Note that a pending 
application
 for lawful permanent resident status alone is not sufficient for determining eligibility for 
Title IV
 funds.

If a person is granted suspension of deportation or cancellation of removal (including special rule cancellation of removal) by an immigration judge or by USCIS, USCIS will issue the individual a 
Form I-551
, which is evidence of LPR status. There is no special category for persons who have been granted suspension of deportation or cancellation of removal (including special rule cancellation of removal).

Some applicants from Afghanistan may be eligible as 
Afghan Special Immigrant Lawful Permanent Residents (SI LPRs)
. These applicants may have MRIVs and/or foreign passports with a DHS, U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) stamp admitting them with an SQ1, SQ2, SQ3, SQ7, SQ8, SW1, SW2, or SW3 Class of Admission. Others may have a temporary Form I-551 stamp in their passport or on a Form I-94. Others may have a Permanent Resident Card, whose expiration date may be extended by a Form I-797C, Notice of Action. Eligible SI LPRs will receive the “Lawful Permanent Resident” response in SAVE. Note that some SI LPRs may not have a physical immigrant visa in their passport and may not have a temporary Form I-551 stamp. For more details, see Dear Colleague Letter 
GEN-23-04
.

Conditional Permanent Residents

Conditional permanent residents are eligible for aid if their documentation has not expired. They may have a valid Form 
I-551, I-94, I-94A
, or a 
passport with an MRIV
 bearing the statement, “Upon endorsement serves as temporary I-551 evidencing permanent residency.”

Reasons an individual may receive conditional permanent residence are described below:

The Marriage Fraud Amendments established lawful permanent resident status on a conditional basis for two years to an individual who obtains lawful permanent resident status through a qualifying marriage to a U.S. citizen or LPR. A qualifying marriage is one that was entered into less than two years before the spouse obtained lawful permanent resident status. This status may also apply to any of the spouse’s children who are not U.S. citizens.

Qualified immigrant investors who invest in U.S. businesses and create jobs for U.S. workers are eligible to receive an employment-based 5th preference (EB-5) immigrant visa. Immigrant investors and derivative family members may obtain lawful permanent resident status on a conditional basis for an initial two-year period. If an immigrant investor files a petition to remove conditions, and USCIS approves the petition, USCIS removes the conditions on the investor’s lawful permanent resident status.

Some applicants from Afghanistan may be eligible as 
Afghan Special Immigrant (SI) Conditional Permanent Residents (SI CPRs)
. These applicants may have a foreign passport with MRIVs and a DHS, CBP stamp admitting them with a CQ1, CQ2, or CQ3 Class of Admission. These applicants may also have a temporary Form I-551 stamp in their foreign passport or on a Form I-94. Others may have a Permanent Resident Card. Eligible SI CPRs will receive the “Conditional Resident” response in SAVE. For more details, see and Dear Colleague Letter 
GEN-23-04
.

A Form 
I-551
 for a conditional permanent resident is the same Form I-551 that is issued to regular lawful permanent residents, except that the card for a conditional permanent resident expires in two years, as opposed to 10 years for the regular card. A conditional permanent resident must file a petition to remove the conditions on permanent residence. USCIS will review the petition and, if eligibility criteria are met, remove the conditions on permanent residence and issue a new PRC with a 10-year expiration date. Conditional permanent residents may also have a Form I-797 that reflect an extension of the I-551 while the petition to remove the conditions on permanent residence is pending.

Conditional Entrants

Conditional entrants are refugees who entered the U.S. under the seventh preference category of P.L. 89-236 or whose status was adjusted to lawful permanent resident alien under that category. Students may have a Form 
I-94
 with a stamp displaying “
Section 203(a)(7)
” and indicating that the person was admitted to the U.S. as a conditional entrant. 
Because this category stopped being used after the enactment of the Refugee Act on March 31, 1980, you should not disburse 
Title IV
 funds if the student has a Form I-94 with conditional entrant status granted after that date.

The stamps mentioned use blue security ink. The stamp contains three codes: the first is a two-digit code to the left of the date that designates the field office with jurisdiction over the port of entry. On most stamps, this code will be two numbers and no letters. Letters are currently only used on HQ stamps. The three-letter code located under the word “ADMITTED” shows the port of entry. The third code, to the right of the date, is the unique four-digit number. When referring to a particular stamp, the port of entry code and the stamp’s unique number should be used.

The endorsement or stamp can be placed anywhere on the Form I-94. If the original stamp does not copy well due to the ink color, you should replicate it by hand on the photocopy. Because CBP offices don’t have uniform procedures or stamps, you should contact the local office with questions regarding acceptable immigration documents.

Refugees

Refugee status continues unless terminated by DHS. Refugees are required to apply for Lawful Permanent Residency (LPR) status one year after admission into the United States as a refugee. In September 2015, CBP automated the refugee process. A refugee will have an electronic Form 
I-94
 showing “RE” as the class of admission and an admit until indicator of “D/S” (indicating duration of status). The 
refugee travel letter
 provided by the Department of State will be annotated with a stamp showing admission under Section 207 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA). While the form is now automated, a refugee may be in possession of an older paper Form I-94 or I-94A or be provided a paper form upon request. The paper Form I-94 or I-94A is annotated with a stamp showing admission under Section 207 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA). They may also have a Form I-766, Employment Authorization Document, with an “A03” category. They may also have the old 
Refugee Travel Document (Form I-571)
 or the newer 
U.S. Travel Document
 annotated with “Refugee Travel Document Form I-571 (Rev. 9-2-03).”

Persons Granted Asylum (Asylees)

Persons granted asylum can be approved for lawful permanent resident status after they have been physically present in the U.S. for at least one year since being granted asylum. Asylee status continues unless rescinded or terminated by DHS or the Department of Justice or until lawful permanent resident status is granted. Asylees will have a Form I-94 or Form I-94A with a stamp showing a grant of asylum under Section 208 of the INA. They may also have a Form I-766, Employment Authorization Document, with a “A05” category. They may also apply for and receive a refugee travel document. Asylees who leave the U.S. and attempt to return without proper travel documentation may have difficulty being readmitted to the U.S. as an asylee.

Persons Paroled into the U.S. for at Least One Year (Parolees)

Persons paroled into the U.S. for at least one year must provide documentation of their parole category (such as a Form I-94 or Form I-766, Employment Authorization Document, with a “C11” category) and it must indicate that the student has been paroled into the U.S. for at least one year, with a date that has not expired (Title IV funds cannot be disbursed after the document has expired). They also must provide evidence, such as having filed a Form 
I-485
, Application to Register Permanent Residence or Adjust Status, or are a beneficiary on a Form 
I-130
, Petition for Alien Relative, from DHS to demonstrate that they are in the U.S. for other than a temporary purpose and intend to become a citizen or LPR. DHS will usually respond to the filing of a Form I-485 with a Form I-797C, Notice of Action, indicating receipt of an application and a parolee must provide this Form I-797C or any other immigration document from DHS showing the student is in the U.S. for other than a temporary purpose and intends to become a U.S. citizen or LPR.

If the student does not submit a Form I-797C, send their alternative documentation during third-step verification to SAVE and ensure that the SAVE response is “Parolee-Expires”, or “Parolee-Indefinite” and that the Pending Applications or DHS Comments sections indicate one of the documents mentioned above. Note that individuals classified as “Advance parolees” are never considered potentially eligible for 
Title IV
 aid.

Ukrainian Citizens or Nationals Paroled into the U.S. Between February 4, 2022, and September 30, 2024 (Ukrainian Parolees)

Ukrainian citizens or nationals (or noncitizens who last habitually resided in Ukraine) paroled into the United States between February 24, 2022 and September 30, 2024 are eligible for entitlement programs and other benefits available to refugees admitted under section 207 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. § 1157) for the term of parole granted, or 
through a new period of parole if applicable
, unless the parole has been terminated by the Secretary of Homeland Security. In addition, Ukrainian citizens or nationals (or noncitizens who last habitually resided in Ukraine, regardless of citizenship) paroled into the United States after September 30, 2024, are eligible for these benefits if they are the spouse or child (unmarried and under 21) of a Ukrainian paroled between February 24, 2022, and September 30, 2024, or the parent, legal guardian or primary caregiver of an “unaccompanied alien child” (UAC) who was paroled between February 24, 2022, and September 30, 2024. The spouse, child, parent, legal guardian, or primary caregiver are eligible for these benefits for the term of parole granted, or through a new period of parole if applicable, unless the parole has been terminated by the Secretary of Homeland Security.

For additional information, please see the Department of Homeland Security’s 
Uniting for Ukraine
 webpage and 
Fact Sheet
. Persons paroled under the Uniting for Ukraine (U4U) process can obtain a copy of their electronic Form I-94, Arrival/Departure Record, from the 
U.S. Customs and Border Protection website
. This Form I-94 record will include a “UHP” class of admission (COA). Parolees into the United States under U4U may also have one or more of the following:

Paper Form I-94 with a UHP COA;

Foreign passport with parole stamp that includes a UHP COA; or

Form I-766, Employment Authorization Document (EAD), with a “C11” category, if they have applied for and received one.

Ukrainian citizens or nationals (or persons who last habitually resided in Ukraine) who were paroled into the United States outside of the U4U process may also obtain, or may have, the same documentation as those paroled under U4U, but with a general parole COA, such as “DT” or “PAR” listed in their Form I-94, Arrival/Departure Record, and/or a parole stamp in their foreign passport. The “DT” COA indicates parole authorized by U.S. Customs and Border Protection District Office or Port of Entry. The “PAR” COA indicates parole authorized by USCIS.

If third-step verification is required, the financial aid office must ensure they provide one of the documents noted above as part of the third-step verification request. If SAVE can verify that the applicant is a parolee, SAVE will provide a “Parolee-Expires” response and the period of parole. If there is a federal immigration record reflecting Ukrainian citizenship, the SAVE response will also state that the financial aid applicant is a Ukrainian citizen.

Unlike other parolee applicants, eligible beneficiaries paroled into the U.S. from Ukraine are not required to have been paroled for at least one year (although they generally have been), nor are they required to have additional documentation (such as a Form I-797C, Notice of Action, indicating receipt of a Form I-485 Application to Register Permanent Residence or Adjust Status) in order to show that they are “in the U.S. for other than a temporary purpose with intent to become a U.S. Citizen or Permanent Resident” (which is a requirement in under Section 484 of the 
HEA
).

Ukrainian citizens or nationals paroled into the United States outside of the applicable timeframes will be required to comply with the standard parolee procedures as outlined in the bullet “Persons paroled into the U.S. at least one year” above.

Please note that some Ukrainian citizens or nationals may have other immigration statuses or categories that make them eligible for 
Title IV
 student aid, such as Refugee or Asylum. These applicants can also have their immigration status/category verified through SAVE.

Afghan Citizens or Nationals Paroled into the U.S. Between July 31, 2021 and September 30, 2023 (Afghan Parolees)

Afghan citizens or nationals (or those who last habitually resided in Afghanistan) paroled into the U.S. between July 31, 2021, and September 30, 2023 may be eligible as Afghan Special Immigrant Parolees (SI Afghan Parolees) or Non-Special Immigrant Afghan Parolees (Non-SI Afghan Parolees) for resettlement assistance, entitlement programs, and other benefits available to refugees admitted under section 207 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. § 1157) until March 31, 2023, or the term of parole granted, whichever is later, unless parole has been terminated by the Secretary of Homeland Security. In addition, Afghan citizens or nationals (or persons who last habitually resided in Afghanistan) paroled into the United States after Sept. 30, 2023 are eligible for these benefits if they are the spouse or child of an Afghan paroled between July 31, 2021 and Sept. 30, 2023, or the parent or legal guardian of an unaccompanied Afghan child who was paroled between July 31, 2021 and Sept. 30, 2023.

SI Afghan Parolees may have a separate Form I-94 with the following notation:

SI Parolees Form I-94 Notation

Special Immigrant Status (SQ/SI) Parolee

Sec 602(b)(1) AAPA / Sec 1059(a) NDAA 2006

Date 
__
 USCIS officer: 
__

SI Afghan Parolees may also have a Form I-766, Employment Authorization Document (EAD), with a C11 parolee category. SI Parolees will receive the “Parolee-Expires” or “Parolee-Indefinite” response in SAVE, with SQ4 or SQ5 as the Class of Admission (COA).

Other applicants from Afghanistan may be eligible as Non-Special Immigrant Afghan Parolees (sometimes referred to as “humanitarian parole” or “OAR parole”). These students may also have an Employment Authorization Document (EAD), with a C11 category or a CBP “PAROLED” stamp in their passport. Some of these passports may have an “OAR” notation in the parole stamp. DHS recently began using this code to help distinguish these Afghans from other parolees. Non-SI Afghan Parolees will receive the “Parolee-Expires” or “Parolee-Indefinite” response in SAVE, with OAR, PAR, or DT as the Class of Admission (COA). For more on Afghan arrival categories and documents, see DHS-SAVE’s 
Afghan Fact Sheet
.

Unlike other Parolee applicants, neither SI Afghan Parolees nor Non-SI Afghan Parolees are required to have been paroled into the U.S. for at least one year (although they generally have been), nor are they required to have additional documentation to show that they are “in the U.S. for other than a temporary purpose with intent to become a U.S. citizen or Lawful Permanent Resident.” This flexibility is a result of the Afghanistan Supplemental Appropriations Act, 2022 and only applies to Afghans paroled between July 31, 2021, and September 30, 2023, or Afghans paroled into the United States after Sept. 30, 2023 if they are the spouse or child of an Afghan paroled between July 31, 2021 and Sept. 30, 2023, or the parent or guardian of an unaccompanied Afghan child who was paroled between July 31, 2021 and Sept. 30, 2023. This flexibility lasts until March 31, 2023, or the term of parole granted, whichever is later, unless the parole is terminated by the Secretary of Homeland Security. After that time, the Afghan arrival will be required to comply with the standard parolee requirements. For more details, see Dear Colleague Letter 
GEN-23-04
.

Cuban-Haitian Entrants

Cuban-Haitian Entrant
 as defined by Section 501(e) of the Refugee Education Assistance Act of 1980. Cuban-Haitian entrant designation relates to benefit eligibility rather than an immigration status. All Cuban-Haitian entrants are potentially eligible for federal student aid. Note that certain documents showing that the holder is a Cuban-Haitian entrant may continue to demonstrate an individual meets the Cuban-Haitian entrants definition even if the expiration date has passed. Please see 
Information for SAVE Users: Cuban-Haitian Entrants
 for examples of documentation, SAVE verification procedures, and other information regarding Cuban-Haitian entrants. If you are not sure whether documentation establishes that someone is a Cuban-Haitian entrant, submit it as part of a third-step verification request following the instructions in the SAVE Cuban-Haitian entrant information sheet. The SAVE response will let you know (in the “Cuban/Haitian Immigration Details” section) whether the submitted information and documentation is sufficient to verify that the student is a Cuban-Haitian entrant. 
Remember to select the Cuban/Haitian Entrant Button in SAVE to verify whether the individual meets the Cuban-Haitian entrant definition. DHS will not verify Cuban-Haitian entrants if you do not select this button.

Victims of Human Trafficking

Victims of a severe form of trafficking in persons are eligible for federal benefits to the same extent as refugees under the 
Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act (VTVPA)
. The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), rather than the DHS, is responsible for certifying individuals that may have an I-94 with a T1 Class of Admission code for principal T nonimmigrants (other T-visa classifications will be identified through DHS’ SAVE process noted below). Because of this, these students will not pass the DHS match, and the normal paper third-step confirmation does not apply. You must instead review the student’s certification or eligibility letter from the HHS and call the Office on Trafficking in Persons at 1-866-401-5510, as noted on the letter, to verify its validity and confirm that the eligibility has not expired.
You must note the date, time, and results of the call and retain a copy of the letter. If the student applies for federal student aid in a subsequent year at your school, you must call again to ensure that the student’s status is still in force.

Individuals granted derivative T nonimmigrant status are also eligible for federal benefits to the same extent as refugees, under the VTVPA, but do not require a certification or eligibility letter from HHS. Derivative T nonimmigrants will have a Form I-94 with a T-2 (spouse), T-3 (child), T-4 (parent), T-5 (sibling under age 18), or T-6 (adult or minor child of derivative beneficiary) Class of Admission code. SAVE can verify the immigration status of these derivative T nonimmigrants. Once SAVE returns a third-step response, you should see “T2,” “T3,” “T4”, “T5”, or “T6” under the Class of Admission (COA) heading. If you do not see one of those codes in the SAVE response, but you believe that the individual is in fact the spouse, child, parent, or sibling of a victim of human trafficking, or the adult or minor child of a derivative T beneficiary, please email 
applicationsystemsdivision@ed.gov
 for assistance. SAVE may also return a response that indicates the individual would be ineligible (such as “nonimmigrant” or “application pending”). These statuses are usually not eligible for federal student aid; however, if any of the COAs noted above are indicated in the SAVE response you can disregard any reference to an ineligible status in the SAVE response.

 Victims of human trafficking
 

T Nonimmigrant Status | USCIS

Battered or Abused Individuals—Qualified Noncitizens

Battered or Abused Spouses or Children adjudicated by DHS as victims of abuse by their U.S. citizen or lawful permanent resident (LPR) spouse, former spouse, or parent may, with their designated children, self-petition for immigration classification under the 
Violence Against Women Act (VAWA)
 and be eligible for certain federal and state public benefits, including federal student aid. Note that both men and women may be approved as victims under 
VAWA
.

These applicants can indicate on the FAFSA form that they are "eligible noncitizens," though they will not pass the automated DHS match. Instead, they will need to obtain and provide you with documentation based on their case type: self-petition, prima facie, suspension of deportation, or cancellation of removal. Check the student’s documentation carefully. If the immigration documents match the description below for an approval of petition or a prima facie case, the student should be considered an "eligible noncitizen." Third-step verification through SAVE is not required.

If you have reservations about the documentation provided, or are unclear about the outcome reflected in the documentation, you must submit the student’s documentation for third-step verification through SAVE. In SAVE, select the “VAWA” button (in the “Agency Requests” section) for 
VAWA
 Verification. You will determine the student’s eligibility for aid based on the result of the submission.

In 
self-petitioning cases
 under 
VAWA
, the immigrant submits a petition (Form I-360, Petition for Amerasian, Widow(er), or Special Immigrant) to USCIS, who will then either deny the petition, approve it, or make a finding that a prima facie case has been established. If USCIS determines that a self-petitioner has demonstrated prima facie eligibility, USCIS issues a Notice of Prima Facie Case (NPFC) to the self-petitioner. Either a Form I-360 approval or a prima facie finding potentially makes a student eligible for 
Title IV
 aid. In some cases, USCIS will acknowledge receipt of a petition, which does not establish eligibility for 
Title IV
 aid.

With an 
approval of a petition
, USCIS will provide a Form I-797, which will indicate it is an approval notice (with “Notice Type: Approval Notice”) for a self-petitioning spouse of a U.S. citizen or LPR (with Section: Self-Petitioning Spouse of USC or LPR), and that the petition has been approved. A separate Form I-797 will be issued with the names and dates of birth of children listed by the applicant, and it will indicate that they are named on the approved petition. These children are potentially eligible for 
Title IV
 aid, and because their USCIS status continues after reaching the age of majority, their eligibility for aid continues as well. In some cases, a dependent child can petition for battered immigrant status; the Form I-797 would then indicate a self-petitioning child of a U.S. citizens or LPR.

If you submit prima facie documentation for third-step verification, SAVE may return the “VAWA Self-Petitioner” response. SAVE may provide a different response so you must also check the “Victim of Abuse” section. If you see an indication of an approved self-petition or prima facie 
VAWA
 status anywhere in the SAVE response, the applicant is eligible. If you have questions about the response, contact 
applicationsystemsdivision@ed.gov
.

Self-petitioners may use the NPFC as evidence to establish their eligibility for certain public benefits and are eligible to renew their NPFC, as needed, until USCIS completes adjudication of the self-petition. NPFCs are initially valid for one year. If USCIS has not made a decision on the self-petition by the time the NPFC expires, USCIS automatically sends a renewed NPFC within 60 days of the expiration date. The NPFC is renewed for 180 days and continues to be renewed for 180-day periods until USCIS adjudicates the self-petition. If the Form I-360 is denied, USCIS does not re-issue or extend the NPFC.

If the student’s documentation for the applicable award year is unexpired when you receive it, the student can be considered eligible for the entire award year. The student will remain eligible even if their documentation expires during the award year. Note that the student would be ineligible for a subsequent award year if the student’s documentation is still expired. Also, if the documentation is expired when you receive it, the student is ineligible unless they provide you with documentation showing that their determination has been extended.

Children may be included on the Form I-797, though their eligibility is subject to the same expiration date. If a spouse is ultimately denied approval, their children on the Form I-797 would also be denied and be ineligible for aid.

If you submit prima facie documentation for third-step verification, SAVE may return the “VAWA Self-Petitioner” response. SAVE may provide a different response so you must also check the “Victim of Abuse” section. If you see an indication of an approved self-petition or prima facie 
VAWA
 status anywhere in the SAVE response, the applicant is eligible. If you have questions about the response, contact 
applicationsystemsdivision@ed.gov
.

An immigration judge may issue a suspension of deportation or cancellation of removal of the abused person under 
VAWA
. For a 
suspension of deportation
, the applicant will receive a copy of the court order. If it clearly indicates suspension of deportation by the judge, and there is no finalized appeal overturning the order, an otherwise eligible person can receive 
Title IV
 funds. For a 
cancellation of removal
, the applicant will receive a copy of the court order. If it clearly indicates cancellation of removal by the judge, an otherwise eligible person can receive 
Title IV
 funds. Suspension of deportation or cancellation of removal documentation alone does not make a student eligible for 
Title IV
 funds. The documentation must reference a self-petition or prima facie determination for the student to be considered potentially eligible.

You must carefully examine the USCIS or immigration court document and keep a copy in the student’s file. If it indicates that the student is an approved self-petitioner or has an unexpired prima facie determination, you may award aid if the student is otherwise eligible. If a self-petitioner applies for 
Title IV
 funds in a subsequent year, you may rely on their original document. For a student with a prima facie determination, you may rely on their document if it is still unexpired. If the documentation has expired, the student is ineligible unless they provide you with documentation showing that their determination has been extended. You must select the "VAWA button" in SAVE before submitting a student's documentation, or SAVE may not confirm VAWA status.

American Indians Born in Canada (Jay Treaty Students)

Section 289 of the 
Immigration and Nationality Act (INA)
 gives persons with at least 50% American Indian blood who were born in Canada the legal right to live and work indefinitely in the U.S. They must obtain an SSN for purposes of applying for 
Title IV
 aid.

These students must enter their valid A-Number on the FAFSA form and indicate they are eligible noncitizens. If they fail the DHS match, you must submit a third-step verification with the student's documentation. If they fail third-step verification, they can still be considered eligible if they meet the documentation requirements below for students without an A-Number.

Students who do not have an A-Number should enter A999999999 and indicate they are eligible noncitizens. Students who enter all 9’s for their A-Number will receive comment 289 on the output document indicating that the A-Number provided is invalid. A DHS case number will not be generated in this instance, so you will not be able to submit a third-step verification request. Instead, if an American Indian born in Canada claiming 
Title IV
 eligibility under the Jay Treaty 
received 
Title IV
 aid in
 the 2023-24 award year (or 
any prior award year
), then the institution may elect under 34 CFR 668.133(b) to not require such a student to submit additional immigration documentation to establish their title IV eligibility where the documents used to establish that eligibility have not expired, and where the institution does not have reason to believe that the student’s claim of citizenship or immigration status is incorrect.

If an American Indian born in Canada claiming Title IV eligibility under the Jay Treaty 
did not previously receive
 
Title IV
 aid in the 2023-24 award year (or any prior award year) and is seeking to establish their status as an eligible noncitizen for the 2024-25 award year or later, then the student may submit any of the following immigration documentation to establish 
Title IV
 eligibility:

Form I-551 PRC with the code S13;

An unexpired temporary I-551 stamp with the code S13 in a Canadian passport; 
or

An unexpired temporary I-551 stamp with the code S13 on an I-94

If you have questions about students who are American Indians Born in Canada, contact 
applicationsystemsdivision@ed.gov
. See also 
DCL GEN-25-06
.

Accessing Admission Records Online: The Form I-94 Website

DHS Customs and Border Protection (CBP) creates admission records electronically. The Form I-94 website allows travelers (and schools, if the traveler grants permission) to access admission records online (the website contains records from April 2011 to present). Unexpired paper Forms I-94 are also still valid.

CBP began issuing Forms I-94 with an alpha character in the 10th position of the 11-character identifier beginning in May 2019.

See 
https://i94.cbp.dhs.gov/I94
.

Photocopying Immigration Documents

In most cases you will examine and copy original immigration documents, and you must keep a copy in the student’s file with the SAVE response from the third-step verification. For the purpose of applying for 
Title IV
 aid, your school's policy may permit students to legally photocopy, scan, or otherwise image immigration documents (such as Forms I-551 or I-94) and submit either electronic images or paper copies of the same to the school’s financial aid office to facilitate the confirmation of their status/category and to complete the third-step verification process. See Dear Colleague Letter 
GEN-15-08
 for more details.

Eligible Noncitizen Name Changes—Notification to SSA and DHS

When an eligible noncitizen student changes their name, the student needs to update it with SSA and DHS. To update their name with DHS, students can contact the 
USCIS Contact Center
 at 800-375-5283 or visit 
the USCIS Immigration Documents and How to Correct, Change, or Replace them
 page. For the SSA update, the student must bring the appropriate documents to substantiate the change to their local SSA office. Visit 
https://www.ssa.gov/personal-record/change-name
.

Ineligible Statuses and Documents

There are several types of documentation that do not substantiate a student’s eligibility for 
Title IV
 aid. If a student provides multiple documents and some do support eligibility, they may be eligible for Title IV aid. However, if a student only provides documentation that does not substantiate their eligibility for 
Title IV
 aid, they are not eligible. Generally, if a student has both an eligible status as well as an ineligible status, the eligible status will trump the ineligible status, and the student will be potentially eligible for 
Title IV
 aide (pending other aspects of student eligibility, as discussed in this volume).

There are a variety of forms and their related statuses which are all ineligible:

A Social Security card or driver’s license is not
 acceptable for documenting U.S. citizenship or national status since ineligible individuals can also have these forms of identification. Enhanced driver’s licenses (provided by a limited number of states to permit non-air travel entry to the U.S. from Canada, Mexico, and the Caribbean) are also not acceptable.

Notice of Approval to Apply for Permanent Residence (Form I-171 or Form I-464)
 holders 
cannot
 receive 
Title IV
 funds.

Employment authorization documents (Form I-766, EAD)
 alone 
do not
 support 
Title IV
 eligibility. However, a student with another eligible status and employment authorization can, potentially, be eligible. USCIS can verify an immigration status or category that may be eligible for aid using the information contained on an EAD.

Nonimmigrant visas
 are generally held by those with work visas, students, visitors, and foreign government officials and 
do not
 convey eligibility for 
Title IV
 funds unless the student has a Form 
I-94
 with one of the endorsements given in the eligible document section, or a 
T Visa
 as a victim of a severe form of trafficking.

Ineligible nonimmigrant visa categories include (but are not limited to) the

F-1, F-2, or M-1 Student Visas;

NATO Visas (NATO);

A-1, A-2, and A-3 Visas (foreign official, including attendants);

B-1 or B-2 Visitor Visas;

J-1 or J-2 Exchange Visitors Visas;

H series or L series Visas (which allow temporary employment in the U.S.); or

G series Visas (pertaining to international organizations).

Form I-817, Application or approval for Family Unity Benefits
 does not prove students are eligible.

Temporary residents allowed to live and work in the U.S. under the Legalization or Special Agricultural Worker program
 are 
no longer
 eligible for Title IV funds. This usually is identified on Form I-766, with a notation that indicates Temporary Resident status.

Illegal aliens under the legalization (also called the amnesty) program established by the 
Immigration Reform and Control Act
 of 1986 (
IRCA
)
 were given documentation that allowed them to work while their application for lawful permanent resident status was being processed. These students 
aren’t eligible
 for 
Title IV
 aid unless their application for lawful permanent resident status was approved.

Temporary Protected Status (TPS)
 allows temporary protection in the United States, when designated by the Secretary of DHS, due to (among other factors) conditions in a country that temporarily prevent the country's nationals from returning safely, or in certain circumstances, where the country is unable to handle the return of its nationals adequately. Students may have Approval notice (Form I-797, Notice of Action) for “Temporary Protected Status” or EAD (Form I-766) with A12 or C19 category. TPS 
does not
 prove students are eligible for 
Title IV
 aid, without another qualifying status/category.

Deferred action
 is a discretionary determination to defer a removal action from the United States as an act of prosecutorial discretion for a certain period of time. An individual who receives deferred action is authorized by DHS to be present in the United States for the period deferred action is in effect. However, deferred action does not confer lawful status. Individuals who have deferred action may have an EAD with a C14 category or a Form I-797, Notice of Action, approval notice. Students who received deferred action are 
not eligible
 for Title IV aid. DACA (listed below), is one type of deferred action.

Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA)
 is granted by USCIS. Students who are DACA recipients may have an EAD (Form I-766) with a C33 category or Form I-797, Notice of Action, approval notice reflecting approval of their form I-812D request. Students granted DACA often are assigned an SSN, and they 
are not
 eligible for 
Title IV
 aid, but may be eligible for state or institutional aid, and submitting a FAFSA form can help them access those other types of aid. To complete the FAFSA form, DACA recipient students must enter their SSN and answer the citizenship status question as “Neither U.S. citizen nor eligible noncitizen.” After submitting the FAFSA form, the student should check with the school’s financial aid office to see what types of non-federal financial aid they may be eligible to receive.

Withholding of removal or deferral of removal orders
 are issued by an immigration judge or by the Board of Immigration Appeals. This is used to protect a person from return to a country that threatens the person’s life or freedom. Individuals granted 
withholding of removal
 may have an EAD with an A10 category, in addition to the order from an immigration judge or the Board of Immigration of Appeals. Individuals granted 
deferral of removal
 may have an EAD with a C18 category, in addition to an order from an immigration judge or the Board of Immigration Appeals. Withholding or deferral of removal, by itself, does 
not
 make the student eligible for 
Title IV
 aid.

U nonimmigrants or U-Visa holders
 are not designated as qualified aliens under the 
Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA)
 and are therefore not eligible for 
Title IV
 program funds. However, U nonimmigrants may adjust to lawful permanent resident (LPR) status after they have been physically present in the U.S. for a continuous period of at least three years since the date of admission as a U nonimmigrant, if they meet other requirements. Documentation of a U nonimmigrant's adjustment to LPR status is usually on a Form 
I-797 reflecting approval of Form I-485
. It is important for you to inspect the content of the document since the Form 
I-797
 is used for a variety of purposes.

If the student adjusts status to an LPR, they become a qualified alien under the 
PRWORA
 (see above), and thus potentially eligible for 
Title IV
 funds (assuming they meet all other eligibility requirements.) U nonimmigrants should be encouraged to explore non-federal aid options to help them pay for school until they adjust to LPR status. StudentAid.gov contains information to help students search for possible scholarships and other resources.

A Form I-797C, Notice of Action
 that shows a 
receipt of the student’s application
, or instructs the student to 
schedule a biometrics appointment
 with USCIS, does 
not
 support eligibility for 
Title IV
 aid (except for Parolee students who have applied for certain immigration statuses, see the Persons paroled into the U.S. for at least one year section above). These documents indicate “THIS NOTICE DOES NOT GRANT ANY IMMIGRATION STATUS OR BENEFIT” at the top. A Form I-797 (no “C”) with Notice Type: “Approval Notice” may be an eligible form of documentation if it approves the student’s application for one of the eligible statuses listed above.

Advance Parole
 Documents allow certain individuals with pending applications for certain immigration benefits to seek parole into the U.S. upon returning to the U.S. after traveling abroad. Proof of Advance Parole may include the following documents issued by DHS: Form I-512L, Authorization of Parole of an Alien Into the United States, Form I-766 EAD with the words “Serves as I-512 Advance Parole,” or Form I-512T, Authorization for Travel by a Noncitizen to the United States. The State Department may also issue a travel/boarding foil on behalf of DHS (a travel or boarding foil is a document which allows certain non-U.S. citizens to board a plane for transport to the U.S.). Individuals issued an Advance Parole Document are not parolees unless they were in a period of parole before the Advance Parole Document was issued, or until they are paroled into the United States. Therefore, the issuance of the Advance Parole Document alone does 
not
 make a person eligible for 
Title IV
 funds.

If the document a student submits is for an ineligible status, you shouldn’t submit the documentation for third-step verification, unless you have conflicting information, or the student requests you to do so. USCIS will only confirm current immigration status/category based on the document presented; it doesn’t determine whether the student is eligible for 
Title IV
 funds (the student must meet all other student eligibility and 
Title IV
 program-specific criteria in addition to citizenship/immigration status requirements). Unless the student can submit documentation for an eligible status/category, as described above, or USCIS verifies the student’s immigration status/category, the student can’t receive aid.

 U-Visa information
 

More information on adjustment to LPR status for U nonimmigrants may be found on the following website: 
Victims of Criminal Activity: U Nonimmigrant Status | USCIS
.

Using the SAVE System for Third-Step Verification

If the student’s immigration documentation appears to support an eligible noncitizen status/category, if you have conflicting information after receiving the match result, or if the student disagrees with the SAVE result, you must complete a third-step verification request through SAVE. USCIS will return third-step verification responses via SAVE.

To access SAVE at 
https://save.uscis.gov/save/app/client/ui/home
 a unique SAVE user ID and password is issued to the Primary Destination Point Administrator (PDPA) at each school when they update their school’s FTI SAIG Enrollment form. Note that accessing SAVE may soon require logging in using login.gov. More information will be available in the future.

All the instructions you need to access and navigate the SAVE system are available on the 
DHS-SAVE, Eligible Noncitizen
 page on the Knowledge Center. 
Select the “DHS-SAVE Electronic Third-Step Verification” link.

For assistance with issues related to SAVE access, please contact 
applicationsystemsdivision@ed.gov
.

Third-Step Verification Process

First, request the student’s most current, unexpired immigration document, following the requirements outlined in the 
Student Rights in Third-Step Verification
 section later in this chapter. When you receive it, make a copy of it. Next, carefully review the student’s immigration documentation against the status and document descriptions above. Finally, determine whether the student’s immigration documentation supports eligibility for 
Title IV
 aid. If it does not support an eligible status, you can tell the student that they are not eligible now but may be eligible if/when they provide evidence of an eligible noncitizen status/category or U.S. citizenship. You should not complete third- step verification for this student. If you are unsure of whether documentation supports eligibility for 
Title IV
 aid, submit a request for third-step verification to SAVE if the applicant provides documentary evidence of meeting the U.S. citizen or eligible noncitizen requirement for federal student aid.

The Resend Record to Matches Process in FAFSA Partner Portal

If you determine that third-step verification cannot be completed for a student, for example, when the case status is “closed,” or the SAVE response doesn’t match the immigration documentation provided by the student, you must complete the “resend record to matches” process in the FAFSA Partner Portal system, formerly FAA Access. This replaces the “requesting a new DHS verification number” process. For the full instructions, see the “Resend Record to Matches to Generate a new ISIR with a new DHS Verification Number” section of the 
SAVE instructions for U.S. Department of Education (School) Users Version 4.0 document
.

Third-Step Verification Processing Times

SAVE processing times for third-step verification may vary, depending on the complexity of the case. You will receive an email from SAVE when the response is available. More information on SAVE’s processing times is available on the 
SAVE Verification Response Time page
.

If you receive the “No cases found” message in SAVE, do not “Resend Record to Matches” in the FAFSA Partner Portal, to generate a new transaction with a new DHS Case Number. Doing so generates a new SAVE case for the student while the first case is still processing and will result in a slower response.

For additional guidance on SAVE and DHS Match Flags, see the SAVE Instructions for U.S. Department of Education (School) Users 4.0 document on the 
DHS-SAVE Electronic Third-Step Verification page
.

SAVE Third-Step Verification Responses

SAVE third-step verification is a manual search of available immigration records. If you don’t receive a response from the USCIS after 
at least 15 business days
 from the date you sent the third-step verification request, if you have sufficient documentation to make a decision, and if you have no information that conflicts with the student’s documents or claimed status/category, you should review the student’s file and determine whether they meet the eligible noncitizen requirements. If the student meets the requirements, make any disbursement for which they are eligible and note in their file that SAVE exceeded the time allotment and that noncitizen eligibility was determined without their verification.

When third-step verification results in an eligible status or category, you must keep a copy of the SAVE response screen. If the third-step verification process indicates a discrepancy, you must ask the student to correct the discrepancy with the appropriate DHS agency. No certification of loans or further disbursement of funds can be made until the record is corrected. If the discrepancy isn’t reconciled, the student must repay all aid except wages earned under FWS. Whenever the student can provide new information, it must be submitted to SAVE as a third-step verification request.

If you have followed the procedures outlined here, including notifying the student of the discrepancy and withholding further payments and loan certifications as soon as a discrepancy is found, your school isn’t liable for aid disbursed prior to third-step verification. This assumes that you had no other conflicting information prior to making the disbursement and had reviewed the available documentation and concluded that the student was otherwise eligible.

Lack of Response (Volume 1, Ch 2, Example 2)

The student is a refugee and received aid from a school. Their status wasn’t confirmed through the DHS match, so the school performed third-step verification. DHS didn’t respond in time, so the school paid the student without any response. When the student applies again, the DHS match still doesn’t confirm the student’s status. Even though the school began third-step verification for the student last year and their documents haven’t expired, because the school never received a SAVE response, the school must perform third-step verification again.

Eligible Noncitizen Status Not Confirmed (Volume 1, Ch 2, Example 3)

On a student’s original application, they didn’t give their A-Number and reported that they were a citizen. When the SSA didn’t confirm this, the student told the FAA at the school that they were a permanent resident. The student added their A-Number and changed their citizenship status to “eligible noncitizen” but the Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements system (SAVE) didn’t confirm the student’s status as an eligible noncitizen status. The student explained to the aid administrator that they had applied for permanent resident status but didn’t have documentation yet. The FAA administrator told the student that when the student received documentation that their application was approved, they should bring it to the school so that it could be submitted to the USCIS for confirmation. The FAA told the student to bring any information supporting their current immigration status to the school so that it could be submitted to the USCIS for confirmation. Depending on the documentation the student provides, it’s possible they will be considered an eligible noncitizen in a class other than permanent resident.

 15 business day USCIS timeframe
 

34 CFR 668.136(b)(3)

Interpreting the SAVE Response

SAVE is responsible for verifying the student’s immigration status/category. The SAVE response does not indicate whether the student is eligible for 
Title IV
 funds. It is the school’s responsibility to determine if the student is eligible based on the student’s immigration documentation and the SAVE response. When you receive the SAVE response, compare it with the list of responses below. If it matches with a response, and with the student’s documentation, and supports an eligible status/category, then the student is eligible (assuming they meet all other student and program eligibility requirements). If it matches with a response, and the student’s documentation, but does not support an eligible status, tell the student they are ineligible until/unless they can provide documentation that supports an eligible status.

If the student’s documentation supports an eligible status but the SAVE response shows an ineligible status, read the DHS comments and resolve any issues raised there (for example, provide a legible copy of the student’s documentation if instructed by SAVE). Once resolved, check the bottom of the SAVE response. If you see a “Still not sure? Institute Additional Verification” link, select the link and submit the student’s new documentation on the next page. If you do not see this link or the student’s case is closed, use the Resend to Matches process (see above) and resubmit third-step verification. If you have questions about the SAVE response or about the student’s documentation, contact 
applicationsystemsdivision@ed.gov
 and briefly describe your issue.

The following list explains whether a response means the student is eligible or ineligible for 
Title IV
 aid. For descriptions of the following immigration statuses/categories, see the earlier sections on eligible and ineligible statuses and their documentation:

Potentially Eligible Statuses:

“Lawful Permanent Resident”
 There are many types of Lawful Permanent Resident. Note that those with a class of admission of Kickapoo Indian are now automatically classified as LPRs by SAVE.

“Conditional Resident”

“Asylee” or “Refugee”

“Parolee-Expires” or “Parolee-Indefinite”
 The student is eligible for aid if paroled into the U.S. for at least one year. The SAVE response will include Pending Applications or DHS Comments sections indicating one of the documents mentioned in the “Persons paroled into the U.S. for at least one year” section above.

“U.S. Citizen”
 Third-Step Verification is for verifying immigration documentation for eligible noncitizens. If the student provided U.S. citizen documentation, do not complete third-step verification. If you accidentally submitted U.S. citizen documentation to SAVE, proceed with verifying the student as a U.S. citizen as instructed in the “U.S. Citizenship Match with the SSA” section earlier in this chapter.

“Cuban/Haitian Entrant”
 Before submitting documentation for these students through SAVE, select the “Cuban-Haitian Entrant” button under the “Additional Requests” section. A Cuban/Haitian Entrant student may be eligible without this response so you must also check the “Cuban/Haitian Immigration Details” section of the response. An eligible student will have the comment, “Applicant is a Cuban/Haitian Entrant.”

"American Indian born in Canada”
 For details, see the Jay Treaty section earlier in this chapter.

“VAWA Self-Petitioner”
 Before submitting documentation for these students through SAVE, select the “VAWA” button under the “Additional Requests” section. A student may still be eligible for VAWA status without this response, so you must also check the Victim of Abuse section of the response. See the information for battered immigrations-qualified aliens earlier in this document for additional guidance. If you have questions about VAWA status, contact 
applicationsystemsdivision@ed.gov
.

Ineligible Statuses:

Each of the following statuses are, by themselves, insufficient to make a student eligible for 
Title IV
 funds. If the SAVE response is an eligible status, followed by an ineligible status (for example, Lawful Permanent Resident - Employment Authorized), ignore the ineligible status portion of the response. Unless an additional eligible status is also submitted, or the student can provide other documentation that can be confirmed by USCIS, students for whom the SAVE response is solely one of the following are not 
Title IV
 eligible:

“Employment Authorized”

“Not Employment Authorized”

“Application Pending”
 In most cases, a student with only a pending application for an eligible noncitizen status/category will not be eligible for 
Title IV
 aid. The student must have documentation showing that their status is approved to be considered eligible.

“Nonimmigrant”
 – Except in the case of a victim of human trafficking (T-Visa). See 
Victims of human trafficking
 section for more information.

“Deferred Action Status" Including Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA)

“Family Unity”

“Temporary Protected Status (TPS)”

“Withholding of Removal”

“Document Appears Altered/Counterfeit.”
 Notify the student that unless corrective action is taken with the USCIS, the case will be submitted to the Office of Inspector General (OIG). Until this is resolved, no further aid may be disbursed, awarded, or certified. If the student does not take corrective action in a timely manner, you must report the case to the OIG (part of which will include resubmitting the document).

“Unable to verify.”
 DHS-USCIS was not able to verify the student’s status/category based on the documentation provided. Carefully read the SAVE response and the DHS Comments section to determine why the student’s status could not be verified and proceed according to the information provided, including any requests by SAVE to institute additional verification. For example, SAVE may indicate:

Resubmit request with both sides of the applicant’s immigration document.
 Select the “Still not sure? Institute Additional Verification” link or perform the “Resend Record to Matches” process in the FAFSA Partner Portal (formerly FAA Access to CPS Online) and resubmit the student’s immigration documents through SAVE with copies of both sides of each document.

Applicant’s Immigration document is illegible.
 Resubmit the student’s immigration documents with higher quality copies of the original documentation.

If you see the “Resubmit Doc” response, this means that this case is available for you to submit the student’s immigration documentation for third-step verification. If you have questions about how to proceed, contact 
applicationsystemsdivision@ed.gov
 and provide a brief description of the issue and the student’s DHS Case Number.

Student Rights in Third-Step Verification

You must allow the student at least 30 days from the time you receive the SAVE response indicating an ineligible status/category to provide documentation of an eligible immigration status/category. During this period and until the results of the third-step verification are received, you can’t deny, reduce, or terminate aid to the student. Unless you can determine that the documentation doesn’t support an eligible noncitizen status/category, you must submit the student’s immigration documents to SAVE within ten business days of receipt. After submitting the documentation to SAVE, if at least 15 business days pass without a response, you can disburse aid to an otherwise eligible student pending the SAVE response if the documentation supports the student’s status as an eligible noncitizen and you don’t have any conflicting information.

Your school isn’t liable if you erroneously conclude that a student is an eligible noncitizen, if you had no conflicting data on file and you relied on:

a FAFSA Submission Summary or ISIR indicating that the student meets the requirements for federal student aid;

a SAVE verification of an eligible immigration status/category in response to a request for third-step verification; or

an immigration document, submitted by the student, that supports an eligible status/category, if SAVE did not respond in a timely fashion.

The student (or parent borrower of a Direct PLUS loan) is liable for any 
Title IV
 funds received if they are ineligible. If you made your decision without having one of the documents above, your school is held responsible for repaying 
Title IV
 funds to the Department. Your school should establish procedures to ensure due process for the student if 
Title IV
 funds are disbursed but the aid office later determines (using third-step verification) that the student isn’t an "eligible noncitizen."

The student must be notified of their ineligibility and given an opportunity to contest the decision by submitting to your school any additional documents that support their claim to be an eligible noncitizen. If the documents appear to support the student’s claim, you should submit them to SAVE using third-step verification. You must notify the student of your office’s final decision based on the third-step verification results.

For every student required to undergo third-step verification, you must furnish written instructions providing:

an explanation of the documentation the student must submit as evidence of an eligible noncitizen status/category;

your school’s deadline for submitting documentation (which must be at least 30 days from the date your office receives the results of the primary confirmation);

notification that if the student misses the deadline, they may not receive 
Title IV
 funds for the award period or period of enrollment;

information about the website: 
https://www.uscis.gov/sites/default/files/document/fact-sheets/Records-Fast-Facts-for-Benefi-Applicants.pdf
, which provides the applicant information about correcting their immigration records so that they can obtain an accurate match for purposes of determining eligibility for Title IV Student Financial Assistance Programs; and

a statement that you won’t decide the student’s eligibility until they have a chance to submit immigration documents.

Documenting Immigration Status in Later Award Years

There are several cases in which 
you must document
 a student’s immigration status/category in a subsequent award year if that student is not confirmed as an eligible noncitizen on the FAFSA Submission Summary/ISIR. For example, a student who presented a 
Temporary Form I-551
 in a prior award year should have received a permanent Form I-551 by the next year and shouldn’t still have a temporary card. You should refer the student to USCIS to obtain a permanent Form I-551 or an updated endorsement on the previous card.

You must also document the eligible noncitizen status/category each award year for:

a 
conditional permanent resident;

a refugee;

a Cuban-Haitian entrant; or

a person granted asylum.

Students in any of these categories may have been redesignated to lawful permanent resident status or may have had their status/category end or be revoked or terminated. You will have to send the documents for third-step verification if the student’s status or category isn’t confirmed through the DHS match. Also note that VAWA prima facie status generally expires after 1 year, and that parolees can potentially become Lawful Permanent Residents if their Form I-485 is approved.

You don’t have to document
 a student’s eligible noncitizen status in subsequent award years if you’ve documented that the student is:

a U.S. citizen or national;

a citizen of the Freely Associated States;

a lawful permanent resident and has Form I-551 or I-151; or

an eligible noncitizen, as indicated by the SAVE response for the previous award year, and the documents supporting the status in question have not expired. However, if a previously eligible noncitizen fails the DHS match again, even if their previous documents used to establish their eligibility have not expired, since they failed the match again, they must be submitted to SAVE to ensure their status has not changed.

You must also have no conflicting information or reason to doubt the student’s claim of having “eligible noncitizen” status. Also note that you must have confirmed the status in a previous award year. You may disburse aid without the USCIS response if the USCIS doesn’t respond in time for that award year, but you can’t count that lack of response as confirmation for the following year.

 Exclusion from subsequent confirmation
 

34 CFR 668.133(b)

 Procedures when ineligibility is determined after disbursement
 

34 CFR 668.136(c)

Replacing Lost, Stolen, or Damaged DHS Documents

If a student can’t locate their official DHS documentation because it is lost, stolen, or damaged, the student must request that the documents be replaced. Individuals who are not U.S. citizens and who are 18 years and older must always have immigration documentation in their possession while in the United States. Requests for replacement of USCIS documents should be made by the student to USCIS. Instructions for replacing documents can be found on the USCIS page 
Immigration Documents and How to Correct, Update, or Replace Them
 or by calling the 
USCIS Contact Center
 at 800-375-5283. More information about correcting records and replacing documents with DHS is also available in the 
SAVE Records Fast Facts for Benefit Applicants
.

To replace a Form I-551 (permanent resident card) students may need to complete a Form I-90, Application to Replace Permanent Resident Card. To replace a Form I-94, students may need to complete a Form I-102, Application for Replacement/ Initial Nonimmigrant Arrival-Departure Document if the student is unable to obtain their Form I-94 from the 
CBP I-94 website
. PDF versions of these and other forms can be downloaded from the USCIS website at 
https://www.uscis.gov/forms/all-forms
. A temporary I-94 may be issued while the replacement documents are pending. If the student needs to replace other immigration documentation, including naturalization or citizenship certificates, they should visit the USCIS pages linked to in the paragraph above . Students can also contact the 
USCIS Contact Center
.

In cases of undue hardship, where the student urgently needs documentation of their status/category, the 
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
 allows them to obtain photocopies of the documents from the USCIS District Office that issued the original documents. The student can submit a Form 
G-639
 to make this request or can request the records online. A student who lost a Certificate of Naturalization or Certificate of Citizenship for any reason 
may file Form N-565, Application for Replacement Naturalization/Citizenship Document, to obtain a replacement from USCIS
. Alternately, the student could apply for a U.S. Passport as proof of citizenship.

A naturalized U.S. citizen student who lost documents or surrendered them when entering prison is responsible for getting copies of them so you can verify their status. You can request copies of immigration documents directly from penal institutions at the request of the student.

Suspect Documents

If you can discern that a document is fraudulent, you must deny the student Title IV aid. If the student submits conflicting information regarding immigration status on the FAFSA form, you must resolve any discrepancies before disbursing Title IV aid. Report altered or misreported information to the Department’s Office of Inspector General at 1-800-MIS-USED or the OIG’s website at: 
https://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/oig/index.html
.

Examples of U.S. Citizenship and Eligible Noncitizen Documents

Some common documents used to demonstrate citizenship and eligible immigration status/categories are shown on the 
USCIS Commonly Used Immigration Documents
 page.

Previous

Next

 Last Modified: 02/06/2026 • Published: 01/23/2025