School Eligibility and Operations | 2025-2026 Federal Student Aid Handbook

2025-2026 Federal Student Aid Handbook

Search

Search

Volume 2

School Eligibility and Operations

Introduction

This volume of the 
Federal Student Aid Handbook
 comprises topics pertaining to colleges’ general obligations in administering the 
Title IV
 student aid programs: institutional and program eligibility, administrative requirements, audits, record keeping, program reviews, and providing information to the public are all explained.

Throughout the Handbook we use “college,” “school,” and “institution” interchangeably unless some more specific use is given. Similarly, “student,” “applicant,” and “aid recipient” are synonyms. “Parents” in this volume refers to the parents of dependent students, and “you” refers to the primary audience of the 
Handbook
: financial aid administrators at colleges. “We” indicates the United States Department of Education (Department, ED), and “HEA” refers to the 
Higher Education Act of 1965
, as amended. “
Title IV
” refers to the student financial aid programs authorized under 
Title IV
 of the HEA.

We appreciate any comments that you have regarding the 
Federal Student Aid Handbook
. We revise and clarify the text in response to questions and feedback from the financial aid community, so please reach out to us about how to improve the 
Handbook
 through the “
Contact Customer Support
” feature in our Partner Connect Help Center clicking on “FSA Handbook” under the Topic section.

This introduction only summarizes the changes and clarifications presented in more detail in the chapters. For more complete guidance, refer to the text in the chapters cited and the pertinent regulations and statutes.

Noteworthy Changes

The Department conducted a technical update of this volume including verification and correction of hyperlinks, references, the addition of information specific to incentive compensation and online program managers, and updates to changes in ownership.

Previous

Next

 Last Modified: 04/10/2026 • Published: 03/28/2021