Withdrawals and the Return of Title IV Funds | 2025-2026 Federal Student Aid Handbook

2025-2026 Federal Student Aid Handbook

Search

Search

Volume 5

Withdrawals and the Return of Title IV Funds

Introduction

This volume covers how a school should manage 
Title IV
 funds when a student completely withdraws from a payment period or period of enrollment.

Throughout the Federal Student Aid Handbook (FSA) we use “college,” “school,” and “institution” interchangeably unless a more specific use is given. Similarly, “student,” “applicant,” and “aid recipient” are synonyms. “Parents” in this volume refers to the parents of dependent students, and “you” refers to the primary audience of the Handbook: financial aid administrators at colleges. “We” indicates the U.S. Department of Education (the Department, ED), and “
Title IV
 aid” is used to identity federal financial aid offered by the Department.

We appreciate any comments that you have on the 
FSA Handbook
. We revise the text based on questions and feedback from the financial aid community, so please reach out to us about how to improve the Handbook through the “
Contact Customer Support
” feature in our Partner Connect Help Center and clicking on “FSA Handbook” under the Topic section.

Changes for 2025-2026

There were no major regulatory changes or updates to 
Volume 5
 in the 2025-26 award year 
Federal Student Aid Handbook
.

Please note that many of the R2T4 requirements outlined in the final rules contained in 
90 FR 470 (January 3, 2025)
 will not be effective until July 1, 2026 and will be discussed in the 2026–27 FSA Handbook. However, there are two new regulatory requirements – LOA allowances for incarcerated students enrolled in term-based Prison Education Programs (PEPs) and a new withdrawal exemption treating students as never attended – that schools can early-implement as noted below.

In Chapter 1, under the “R2T4 Withdrawal Exemptions” section, we inserted a discussion of the new withdrawal exemption allowing schools to treat students as never attending if certain requirements are met. The new withdrawal exemption was outlined in the January 3, 2025 final regulations, which schools have an option of early implementing as of February 3, 2025.

We added guidance under the “Approved Leave of Absence” section in Chapter 1, which expanded the exception to not have a student resume training at the same point they began the LOA for students enrolled in an eligible Prison Education Programs (PEP) that uses a term-based academic calendar. This new LOA allowance was also outlined in the January 3, 2025 final regulations, which schools have an option of early implementing as of February 3, 2025.

Under “Payment Period” in Chapter 1, we provided clarification on when a student would officially be considered to have begun the next payment period if the student completes a payment period on the same day they withdraw.

In Chapter 1, under “Funds to Include in an R2T4 Calculation,” we removed references to the Iraq and Afghanistan Service Grant as that program no longer exists and has been replaced by additional eligibility within the Pell Grant program.

We added guidance in the “
Title IV
 Aid Disbursed” section in Chapter 2 Part 1 clarifying that schools cannot alter the types of aid disbursed in the R2T4 calculation once a student has withdrawn.

In Chapter 2 Part 1, under “Determining the Length of Scheduled Breaks,” we added an example explaining school options when some students still have class during a portion of a formal scheduled break.

In Chapter 2 Part 2, under “Order of Return of 
Title IV
 Funds,” we removed references to the Iraq and Afghanistan Service Grant as that program no longer exists and has been replaced by additional eligibility within the Pell Grant program.

Within the Volume 5 Appendix, we created updated R2T4 worksheets as of July 1, 2025 removing references to the Iraq and Afghanistan Service Grant.

Occasionally the Department publishes additional questions and answers to the 
Program Integrity - Return of Title IV Funds Question & Answer (Q&A) section
 of the Department’s website. We recommend periodically checking for new information and guidance.

Previous

Next

 Last Modified: 01/28/2026 • Published: 03/28/2021