The Campus-Based Programs | 2025-2026 Federal Student Aid Handbook

2025-2026 Federal Student Aid Handbook

Search

Search

Volume 6

The Campus-Based Programs

Introduction

The Campus-Based Programs include the Federal Work-Study Program (FWS), the Federal Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grant Program (FSEOG), and the Federal Perkins Loan Program (Perkins Loans). This volume provides the information that schools need to administer those programs.

Throughout the Federal Student Aid Handbook, we use “college,” “school,” and “institution” interchangeably unless a more specific use is given. “You” refers to the primary audience of the Handbook: financial aid administrators at institutions of higher education. “We” indicates the U.S. Department of Education (the Department, ED).

Throughout the year, the Department of Education (The Department) provides updates for schools in the form of Dear Colleague Letters (DCLs). These and other releases, such as 
Federal Register
 notices and electronic announcements, contain system updates and technical guidance, and are available on the FSA Partner Connect website (
fsapartners.ed.gov
).

The 
FSA Handbook
 does not cover the operation of software. For schools using software provided by the Department, there are technical references on FSA Partner Connect that explain how the software operates. Schools using third-party software should consult the vendor’s reference materials for technical guidance.

Below, we provide a summary of the significant changes and clarifications presented in greater detail in the chapters that follow. The FSA Handbook text is not the only source of guidance needed to 
satisfactorily administer the 
Title IV
 HEA programs.
 For more complete guidance, you should also refer to the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), and the 
Higher Education Act
 (HEA) as amended.

Recent Changes

Here are some of the significant changes to 
Volume 6
 for 2025-2026:

Chapter 1: Campus-Based Programs Common Elements

Updated FISAP process deadline dates

Guidance on the sunsetting of the CARES Act and related COVID national emergency guidance for Campus-Based programs removed (for detail on what provisions were previously in effect, see the 2024-25 and prior editions of the Handbook)

Clarified and expanded guidance on eligibility rules for 
Title IV
 aid for citizens of the Freely Associated States, including program types available for each of the Freely Associated States, and provision for in-state tuition

General guidance on overaward tolerance for the Campus-Based programs from Vol. 4

New point of contact listed for questions about Title III and Title V eligibility

The G6 system and website has reverted to the G5 system and website: 
www.G5.gov

Chapter 2: The Federal Work-Study Program

Updated guidance on the ending of the automatic waiver of the FWS community service expenditure requirement which was related to the COVID national emergency, and added link to CB-25-06, which describes the process of applying for a waiver

Guidance on addressing overawards in FWS wages was moved into Chapter 2 from 
Volume 4

Removed sunsetting of CARES Act FWS flexibilities guidance (for detail on what provisions were previously in effect, see the 2024-25 and prior editions of the FSA Handbook)

Expanded and updated guidance on reporting FWS wages

Chapter 3: Participating in the Perkins Loan Program

Clarified guidance on calculating Perkins distribution of assets and returning funds to the Department

Updated information on Perkins NSLDS reporting, including guidance on the Perkins Loan Portfolio Report (PRKPF1), and the Perkins Extract by Parameters Report (REC001)

Chapter 4: Perkins Repayment Plans, Forbearance, Deferment, Discharge, and Cancellation

Reorganized economic hardship deferment guidance for improved clarity

Several section headings amended for greater precision

Chapter 5: Perkins Loan Billing, Collection, and Default

Sunsetting of the Fresh Start Initiative described

Section headings throughout chapter amended for greater precision

Updated information on the School Participation Teams, which have been unified into a single team to address questions from all schools

Chapter 6: The Federal Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grant Program

Clarified several headings for greater precision

Added information imported from 
Volume 4
 on handling FSEOG overpayments

Comments? Questions?

We appreciate any comments that you have on 
Volume 6
 of the 
FSA Handbook
. We revise the text based on questions and feedback from the financial aid community, so please reach out to us about how to improve the Handbook through the “Contact Customer Support” feature in 
Partner Connect’s
 Help Center, clicking on “FSA Handbook” under the Topic section.

Previous

Next

 Last Modified: 12/10/2025 • Published: 03/28/2021