CSS Profile Home – CSS Profile | College Board

In observance of Memorial Day, Customer Service will be closed Monday, May 25th.

Apply with CSS Profile

 CSS Profile
 

 Each year CSS Profile unlocks access to more than $14 billion in nonfederal aid to thousands of students.
 

 Sign in to Fall 2026/Spring 2027
	

 Check Participating Schools and Scholarships

Review which colleges, schools, and scholarship programs use CSS Profile.

 Learn More
	

 Learn How to Apply

Review our step-by-step guide to completing your CSS Profile application.

 Complete the Application
	

 Information for Parents

Learn more about completing the CSS Profile as a parent, including as a noncustodial parent.

 Information for Parents
	

 BigFuture®

Need more information on paying for college? Learn more on BigFuture!

 BigFuture.org
	

 "Coming from a low-income family, I had no way of paying for college. Due in part to the CSS Profile, it made it possible for me to attend college."

 CSS Profile Student Applicant

Complete the CSS Profile

 Need help completing your CSS Profile? Watch our quick overview to navigate the process and check out our other resources, like the Frequently Asked Questions, to find more information.
 

Close Modal

 Close
 

 Getting Started

Here’s a list of our most helpful resources to make it easier for you to apply.

 Get Started
	

 Fee Waivers

CSS Profile is free for families who make up to $100,000 a year.

 See If You Qualify
	

 Divorced or Separated Families

Some colleges may require the CSS Profile from both the custodial and noncustodial parent. 

 Learn More
	

 International Students

Many colleges provide scholarship aid to international students.

 Know What to Expect
	

 en Español

Estamos listos para ayudarle.

 Aprender Más
	

Resources

Download

 
 CSS Profile Waiver Request for the Noncustodial Parent
 

PDF

334.92 KB

Download

 
 CSS Profile Fee Waivers
 

 
 Read our FAQ for more details on submitting CSS Profile for free.
 

PDF

135.9 KB