Who Is Eligible
Federal Pell Grants usually are awarded only to undergraduate students who display exceptional financial need and have not earned a bachelor's, graduate, or professional degree. (In some cases, however, a student enrolled in a postbaccalaureate teacher certification program or an eligible workforce program might receive a Federal Pell Grant.) Additionally, you may be eligible to receive a Federal Pell Grant if you are confined or incarcerated and enrolled in an approved Prison Education Program, or are subject to an involuntary civil commitment upon completion of a period of incarceration for a forcible or nonforcible sexual offense.

Alert: Don’t accept unexpected offers of financial aid or help (such as a “pandemic grant” or “Biden loan forgiveness”) without checking with your school to see if the offer is legit. Learn how to avoid scams.

A Federal Pell Grant, unlike a loan, does not have to be repaid, except under certain circumstances. Find out why you might have to repay all or part of a federal grant.

You may not receive Federal Pell Grant funds from more than one school at a time.

How to Apply
You should start by submitting a Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA®) form. Schools use the information on the FAFSA® form to determine your eligibility for a Pell Grant, and if so, how much you’re eligible to receive. You will have to fill out the FAFSA form every year you’re in school to stay eligible for federal student aid, including Pell Grant awards.

It's important to understand the cost of attendance at your school of choice so that you can understand how much aid you might need. The cost of attendance of a school program is the annual cost advertised by the school before financial aid is applied. Tuition and fees, housing and meals, and other additional education-related expenses (both direct and indirect) are included and may vary based on personal choices. Once you know the cost of attendance, you can better plan how to cover your educational expenses.

Award Amounts
Award amounts can change yearly. The amount for the 2026–27 award year is provided below. We’ll add the amount for the 2027-28 award year when it’s available.

2026–27 Award Year
The maximum Federal Pell Grant award is $7,395 for the 2026–27 award year (July 1, 2026, to June 30, 2027).

The amount you get, though, will depend on

your Student Aid Index (based on your FAFSA form),

the cost of attendance (determined by your school for your specific program),

your status as a full-time or part-time student,

your plans to attend school for a full academic year or less, and

your remaining Pell eligibility under your Pell lifetime eligibility used (LEU) amount.

In certain situations, an eligible student can receive up to 150 percent of his or her scheduled Pell Grant award for an award year.

For example, if you are eligible for a $2,000 Pell Grant for the award year and are enrolled full-time for both the fall term and spring term, you’ll likely receive $1,000 in the fall and $1,000 in the spring. However, under certain circumstances, you may be eligible to receive up to an additional $1,000 for attendance in an additional term within that award year (resulting in your receiving 150% of your original award). You might hear this situation being referred to as “year-round Pell.” For details, contact your school’s financial aid office.

Please note that you can receive the Federal Pell Grant for no more than 12 terms full-time terms or the equivalent (roughly six years). You’ll receive a notice if you’re getting close to your limit. If you have any questions, contact your financial aid office.

If you’re eligible for a Federal Pell Grant, you’ll receive the full amount you qualify for—each school participating in the program receives enough funds each year from the U.S. Department of Education to pay the Federal Pell Grant amounts for all its eligible students. The amount of any other student aid for which you might qualify does not affect the amount of your Federal Pell Grant.

Additional Pell Grant Eligibility
If your parent died while serving on active duty in the U.S. armed forces or as a public safety officer, you may be eligible for maximum Pell Grant funds.

How Funds Are Delivered
Your school can apply Federal Pell Grant funds to your school costs, pay you directly, or combine these methods. Learn more about how (and when) you’ll be paid.

How to Maintain a Pell Grant
In general, you must maintain enrollment in an undergraduate course of study at a nonforeign school to receive a Federal Pell Grant. Additionally, you will have to fill out the FAFSA form every year you’re in school to stay eligible for federal student aid.

Once you have earned a baccalaureate degree or your first professional degree or have used up all 12 terms of your eligibility, you are no longer eligible to receive a Federal Pell Grant.