The Federal Pell Grant Program | 2024-2025 Federal Student Aid Handbook

2024-2025 Federal Student Aid Handbook

Search

Search

Volume 7

The Federal Pell Grant Program

Introduction

This volume of the 
Federal Student Aid Handbook
 provides information to assist schools in determining student eligibility for and calculating Federal Pell Grants.

Content and Organization of Volume 7

This volume was new to the 
Federal Student Aid Handbook
 for 2023–24 and is now updated based on the changes to the Pell Grant program mandated by the 
FAFSA Simplification Act
, which go into effect for the 2024–25 award year.

Chapter 1: Pell Grant Award Eligibility

Chapter 2: Calculating Pell Grants

Chapter 3: Pell Grant Enrollment Intensity and Cost of Attendance

Chapter 4: Calculating Annual Awards using Pell Grant Formulas

Chapter 5: Summer Terms, Crossover Payment Periods, and Year-Round Pell

Chapter 6: Transfer Students and Remaining Eligibility

Chapter 7: Initial Calculations, Recalculations, and Overawards

Chapter 8: Pell Grant Lifetime Eligibility Used (LEU)

Appendix A: Pell Formula Summaries

Significant Changes for 2024–25

Throughout 
Volume 7
, all dates, award years, and dollar values have been updated to reflect the 2024–25 processing year. Also, where appropriate, links and publications associated with FSA’s Partner Connect and Knowledge Center have been updated.

Note:
 Citations are to the Higher Education Act (HEA) of 1965, as amended, effective July 1, 2024.

Chapter 1

Chapter 1 discusses the sunset of the Iraq and Afghanistan Service Grant (IASG) program as a separate grant program. It further describes the eligibility criteria for dependents of certain deceased veterans and public safety officers for the maximum Pell Grant under the Special Rule in HEA Section 401(c).

Chapter 2

Chapter 2 includes descriptions of the three ways a student may qualify for a Pell Grant starting with the 2024-25 award year:

Maximum Pell Grant (Max Pell)

Minimum Pell Grant (Min Pell)

Calculated Pell Grant, based on the Student Aid Index (SAI)

This chapter also discusses the elimination of the Pell Grant Payment and Disbursement Schedules.

Chapter 3

Chapter 3 describes the transition from the use of enrollment status to enrollment intensity to determine a Pell Grant payment amount and how a student’s Scheduled Award must be adjusted if a student is enrolled less than full time.

Chapter 4

Chapter 4 includes detailed discussions of Pell Formulas 1-5, which remain unchanged. However, the chapter explains that enrollment intensity replaces enrollment status categories as a measure of part-time enrollment.

Chapter 5

The discussion of Year-Round Pell Grant in Chapter 5 explains the elimination of the requirement for students to be enrolled at least half time in the term in which they exceed 100% of their Scheduled Award.

Chapter 8

Chapter 8 includes information on the conversion of former IASG Lifetime Eligibility Used (LEU) percentages to Pell Grant LEU and the impact this may have on students who meet or exceed the 600% Pell Grant LEU limit as a result.

Previous

Next

 Last Modified: 02/28/2024 • Published: 08/25/2023